# GCPNatalityDataset

Used the BigQuery public dataset natality (`bigquery-public-data.samples.natality`) in Google Cloud Platform to enhance my SQL querying skills when dealing with high-volume datasets.

- avgweights.sql generates tables with the average weight of a newborn in kilograms between 1988 and 2008 and calculate a delta between the current average weight to the one exactly 20 years prior for data mining.

- month_weekday_birth_analysis.sql uses queries for exploratory analysis around the month and weekday of births and making conclusions based on the findings. 

During my exploratory analysis around the month and weekday of births in the natality table, I noticed that the most common months for women to give birth from the years 1967 to 2008 were July, August, and September. To dig into this further, I decided to rank the top 3 combinations of months newborns were born, their mothers’ race, and the total number of births per month based on the mother’s race. This helps me break down the number of newborns being born in the top 3 months and what their mothers’ races are. With this, I concluded that July, August, and September were the most popular months for women to give birth because they are white women’s, black women’s, women who are of unknown race, American Indian women, and Japanese women’s month preferences. The majority of the newborns in this dataset have White, Black, and of unknown race mothers. This suggests that we are dealing with imbalanced data samples, and it might not be the best reflection of ALL women’s birth month preferences. However, in the case that we are dealing with balanced data samples, we could conclude that July, August, and September are the most popular months for women to give birth because fall and winter conceptions are most common within couples. 

I also noticed that when it came to weekdays, most women gave birth on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays. Using the same method before of partitioning total number of births by weekday and mother’s race, I found that Thursday is the most prevalent common ground for all mothers of different races. With this information, we can conclude that while Tuesday has the highest total birth count, Thursday is the most preferred weekday for mothers of various races. 

- substance_effect_births.sql looks at defining patterns in the natality dataset regarding average weights of newborns with mothers who use substances versus mothers who do not.

I found is that the average weight of a newborn baby differs per state. Based on my results, newborns from Alaska have the heaviest average weight with 7.595 lbs, and newborns from Mississippi have the lowest average weight of 7.140 lbs. I did more research to see if there’s a connection between a newborn’s weight being higher or lower if their mother smoked cigarettes or drank alcohol. I found that the average weight of newborns whose mothers smoke tends to be lower than that of newborns whose mothers did not smoke. For example, the average weight of newborns in Alaska whose mothers participated in cigarette use was 7.219 lbs, whereas if not, their average weight was 7.610 lbs. I found that the same pattern is evident for Mississippi as well. As for alcohol use, the results are similar to the cigarette use results. For example, in Mississippi, newborns’ average weight pertaining to the fact that their mother had alcohol use was 6.607 lbs, whereas if their mothers hadn’t, their average weight was 7.101 lbs. These results could have deeper correlations if I branch out and do more research outside of this dataset within the subject of whether the residents of Mississippi tend to have a higher cigarette and alcohol use compared to the state of Alaska, which could ultimately lead to nuances in newborns’ average weights.
